Characteristics of Big Data, Veracity.
Veracity of Big Data refers
to the quality of the data.
It sometimes gets referred
to as validity or
volatility referring to
the lifetime of the data.
Veracity is very important for
making big data operational.
Because big data can be noisy and
uncertain.
It can be full of biases,
abnormalities and it can be imprecise.
Data is of no value if it's not accurate,
the results of big data analysis are only
as good as the data being analyzed.
This is often described in analytics
as junk in equals junk out.
So we can say although big data
provides many opportunities to make
data enabled decisions,
the evidence provided by data
is only valuable if the data
is of a satisfactory quality.
There are many different
ways to define data quality.
In the context of big data,
quality can be defined as a function
of a couple of different variables.
Accuracy of the data, the trustworthiness
or reliability of the data source.
And how the data was generated
are all important factors
that affect the quality of data.
Additionally how meaningful the data
is with respect to the program that
analyzes it, is an important factor, and
makes context a part of the quality.
In this chart from 2015,
we see the volumes of data increasing,
starting with small amounts
of enterprise data to larger,
people generated voice over IP and
social media data and
even larger machine generated sensor data.
We also see that the uncertainty of
the data increases as we go from
enterprise data to sensor data.
This is as we would expect it to be.
Traditional enterprise
data in warehouses have
standardized quality solutions
like master processes for extract,
transform and load of the data which
we referred to as before as ETL.
As enterprises started incorporating less
structured and unstructured people and
machine data into their
big data solutions,
the data become messier and
more uncertain.
There are many reasons for this.
First, unstructured data on the internet
is imprecise and uncertain.
In addition, high velocity big data
leaves very little or no time for
ETL, and in turn hindering the quality
assurance processes of the data.
Let's look at these product reviews for
a banana slicer on amazon.com.
One of the five star reviews say that
it saved her marriage and compared it
to the greatest inventions in history.
Another five star reviewer said
that his parole officer recommended
the slicer as he is not
allowed to be around knives.
These are obviously fake reviewers.
Now think of an automated product
assessment going through such
splendid reviews and estimating lots
of sales for the banana slicer and
in turn suggesting stocking more
of the slicer in the inventory.
Amazon will have problems.
For a more serious case let's look at
the Google flu trends case from 2013.
For January 2013,
the Google Friends actually
estimated almost twice as many
flu cases as was reported by CDC,
the Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention.
The primary reason behind this was that
Google Flu Trends used a big data on
the internet and did not account properly
for uncertainties about the data.
Maybe the news and social media
attention paid to the particularly
serious level of flu that
year effected the estimate.
And resulted in what we
call an over estimation.
This is a perfect example for
how inaccurate the results can be if
only big data is used in the analysis.
Imagine the economical impact of
making health care preparations for
twice the amount of flu cases.
That would be huge.
The Google flu trends example
also brings up the need for
being able to identify where exactly
the big data they used comes from.
What transformation did
big data go through up
until the moment it was used for
a estimate?
This is what we refer
to as data providence.
Just like we refer to
an artifacts provenance.
As a summary, the growing
torrents of big data pushes for
fast solutions to utilize
it in analytical solutions.
This creates challenges on
keeping track of data quality.
What has been collected,
where it came from, and
how it was analyzed prior to its use.
This is akin to an art artifact
having providence of everything
it has gone through.
But even more complicated to achieve
with large volumes of data coming
in varieties and velocities.